Standalone Soda Core guide (#410)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/soda_guide.md

---
title: "Soda and Airflow"
description: "Use Soda Core for data quality checks with Airflow"
date: 2022-08-02T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "data-quality"
heroImagePath: null
tags: ["Soda", "Data Quality"]
---

## Overview

Soda Core is an open source framework for data quality checks using the SodaCL command-line interface to run checks defined in a YAML file.

Reasons to use Soda Core are:

- Very flexible in how you can define your checks using predefined metrics or full SQL statements.

> - [Offers check configurations](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/optional-config.html) that can add a warn state for a check. For example having values > 10 in a column might warrant a warning, while a value over 100 in the same column leads the check to fail.

Author: True. I changed it to:

```markdown
- Lets you define checks as YAML configuration with many predefined metrics available.
- If there is no metric available for your use case you can provide any SQL query within the YAML file and check against its returned value.
- Easy to set up a large amount a data quality checks.
```

> - [Offers check configurations](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/optional-config.html) that can add a warn state for a check. For example having values > 10 in a column might warrant a warning, while a value over 100 in the same column leads the check to fail.

Author: Good point, thanks! :)

```YAML
# the first line names the datasource "MY_DATASOURCE"
data_source MY_DATASOURCE:
  type: snowflake
  connection:
    # provide your snowflake username and password in double quotes
    username: "MY_USERNAME"
    password: "MY_PASSWORD"
    # provide the account in the format xy12345.eu-central-1
    account: my_account
    database: MY_DATABASE
    warehouse: MY_WAREHOUSE
    # if your connection times out you may need to adjust the timeout value
    connection_timeout: 300
    role: MY_ROLE
    client_session_keep_alive:
    session_parameters:
      QUERY_TAG: soda-queries
      QUOTED_IDENTIFIERS_IGNORE_CASE: false
  schema: MY_SCHEMA
```

In the second step you can define your data quality checks using the [many checks available for Soda CL](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/soda-cl-overview.html). If you cannot find a predefined metric or check that works for your use case you can create a User-defined check using SQL as shown below.

```YAML
checks for example_table:
  # check that MY_DATE_COL has dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01 using regex
  - invalid_count(MY_DATE_COL) = 0:

>       valid regex: (((20)?(1[7-9]|2[0-1]))[-](0?[0-9]|1[012])[-](0?[0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[01])|2022[-]01[-]01)

Author: thank you! 😅  I will be changing that check because it would only work if the date column is defined as TEXT which I hope for most users it would not be. I'll show of regex support with a less wieldy example.

>       valid regex: (((20)?(1[7-9]|2[0-1]))[-](0?[0-9]|1[012])[-](0?[0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[01])|2022[-]01[-]01)

Reviewer: An easier regex example might be looking for a certain website address or even just that a US postal code is formatted correctly.

(The regex is also still wrong in terms of date-checking because it does not conditionally check that a month is given an appropriate day, so it would assume the date `2021-02-30` is correct!)

>       valid regex: (((20)?(1[7-9]|2[0-1]))[-](0?[0-9]|1[012])[-](0?[0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[01])|2022[-]01[-]01)

Author: Yeah, also they do offer a whole list of shorthands including one for valid dates and postal codes: https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/validity-metrics.html#list-of-valid-formats

The only reason this was a regex was because I ran a date bounds check on a date column in TEXT format because I   like to make my life harder apparently. 

certain website address is a good idea, I'll use that :)

  # check that all entries in MY_DATE_COL are unique
  - duplicate_count(MY_DATE_COL) = 0
  # check that MY_TEXT_COL has no missing values
  - missing_count(MY_TEXT_COL) = 0
  # check that MY_TEXT_COL has at least 10 distinct values using SQL
  - distinct_vals >= 10:
      distinct_vals query: |
        SELECT DISTINCT(MY_TEXT_COL) FROM example_table
  # check that MY_NUM_COL has a minimum between 90 and 110
  - min(MY_NUM_COL) between 90 and 110
  # check that example table has at least 1000 rows
  - row_count >= 1000
  # check that the sum of MY_COL_2 is bigger than the sum of MY_COL_1
  - sum_difference > 0:
      sum_difference query: |
        SELECT SUM(MY_COL_2) - SUM(MY_COL_1) FROM example_table
  # checks that all entries in MY_COL_3 are part of a set or possible values
  - invalid_count(MY_COL_3) = 0:
      valid values: ['val1', 'val2', 'val3', 'val4']
```

> After creation of the YAML files write a bash script that will be executed by the BashOperator in your Airflow environment. It is considered best practice to use Soda Core in a virtual environment.

Reviewer: Do we have a reference on where it says to use Soda Core in a virtual env? IIRC it was to install it in one, but given that we're just spinning up and down a worker node, it shouldn't matter because the env will be clean every time. And the lib should be installed in the Airflow instance's python path anyway.

Author: Yes, you are right, their documentation shows venv for local installation. I had issues at first running soda scan directly even though I had the lib installed at the OS level (the error I got was that the command `soda scan` was not available), but since it is working now I'll change it to not need a script at all. One less step 🙂

The bash script below:

- creates a virtual environment
- provides it with the `checks.yml` and `configuration.yml` files
- enters the virtual environment
- installs the `soda-core-snowflake` package in the virtual environment

> - runs the `soda scan` command on `MY_DATASOURCE` using the configuration files.

Reviewer: I think these should be updated to not have to install the package (or even enter the virtual environment). The bash script on a worker machine in Airflow should be lighter weight.

> > **Note** It is important to make this script executable by running `chmod +x filepath/soda_script.sh` before providing it to your Airflow environment. For more information on using bash scripts with Airflow see the ['Running scripts using the BashOperator' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/scripts-bash-operator/).

Reviewer: `filepath` --> `<filepath>`

Author: Deleted this Note but was able to use that comment later :)

```bash
#!/bin/bash
python -m venv .venv
cp /usr/local/airflow/include/soda/checks.yml .venv/include
cp /usr/local/airflow/include/soda/configuration.yml .venv/include
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install soda-core-snowflake
cd .venv/include

> soda scan -d MY_DATASOURCE -c configuration.yml checks.yml

Reviewer: With the `-c` flag in the soda scan command, you can specify the full file path. I think it would be better practice to specify a `SODA_PATH` env var in the Dockerfile and use that var in the command here. The `checks.yml` file should also be able to take a full file path.

Additionally, the `pip install` should happen in the `requirements.txt` file, or otherwise outside the script.

```

The DAG code itself stays very simple with one task using the `BashOperator` to execute the script.

```python
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import datetime
from airflow.operators.bash import BashOperator

with DAG(
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=datetime(2022,7,1),
    dag_id="soda_example_dag",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:

    soda_test = BashOperator(
        task_id="soda_test",
        # please not the space at the end of the command!
        bash_command="/usr/local/airflow/include/soda/soda_script.sh "

>     )

Reviewer: Make sure to add the task below the operator so it actually gets added to the DAG graph!

Reviewer 2: I'm confused by this...unless you're using taskflow, instantiating an operator is enough to register it in the DAG. So you shouldn't need the `soda_test` line below, unless I'm missing something here...

Author: no, not missing anything. Benji and I were confused there 😅

---
title: "Soda Core and Airflow"

> description: "Use Soda Core for data quality checks with Airflow"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Using Soda Core to implement data quality checks in Airflow DAGs"
```

date: 2022-08-02T00:00:00.000Z

> slug: "data-quality"

Reviewer 2: The slug should be the same as the name of the file - so "soda_guide" in this case. Maybe we should make the name soda-data-quality or airflow-soda or something like that, to be a bit more consistent with the other ones (not that they all follow a convention, but there are a few patterns we tend to use...)

heroImagePath: null
tags: ["Soda", "Data Quality"]
---

[Soda Core](https://www.soda.io/core) is an open source framework for data quality checks using the SodaCL interface to run checks defined in a YAML file.

Soda Core lets you:

- Define checks as YAML configuration with many predefined metrics available.
- Provide any SQL query within the YAML file and check against its returned value, if no predefined metrics fit your use case.
- Easily set up a large amount of data quality checks.
- Integrate data quality checks with commonly used data engineering tools such as Airflow, Apache Spark, PostgreSQL, Snowflake [and more](https://www.soda.io/integrations).

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's add an "In this guide, we'll cover how to use Soda Core with Airflow" type sentence here at the end of the overview.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think in general the more we can be consistent with the new templates the better, but I'll leave this one up to you however you prefer it.

> > **Note**: For a general overview on how to approach data quality and of different tools available to run data quality checks using Airflow see the 'Data Quality and Airflow' guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: For a general overview on how to approach data quality, and of different tools available to run data quality checks using Airflow, see the 'Data Quality and Airflow' guide.
```

## Assumed Knowledge

To get the most out of this guide, users should have knowledge of:

- How to design a data quality approach

> - What Airflow is and when to use it

Reviewer 2: I think we can leave this out of assumed knowledge sections for everything other than the "101" type guides. I tend to think if it would be in every single one then it isn't super meaningful

> - Airflow Operators

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Airflow operators
```

> - Airflow Operators

Reviewer 2: Once we have the update published, let's actually change this to the Airflow BashOperator specifically since we don't talk about any others, and then link to that guide.

- Relational Databases
- Basic familiarity with writing YAML configurations

The following resources are recommended:

- Data Quality and Airflow

> - [Introduction to Apache Airflow](Introduction to Apache Airflow)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Same comment as above, let's remove this one.

- [Operators 101](Operators 101)
- [Relational database on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_database)
- [The Official YAML Web Site](https://yaml.org/)

> ## Features of Soda Core

Reviewer 2: I think it would make sense somewhere in this section to add something about _why_ you would want to use Soda with Airflow

> Soda Core uses the SodaCL to run data quality checks defined in a YAML file. In this section we will highlight different types of checks. For a full overview please refer to the [Soda CL documentation](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/soda-cl-overview.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Soda Core uses the SodaCL to run data quality checks defined in a YAML file. In this section, we will highlight different types of checks you can implement with Soda Core. For a full overview please refer to the [Soda CL documentation](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/soda-cl-overview.html).
```

> Standard check metrics offer the ability to run checks on individual columns:

Reviewer 2: Can we be a bit more explicit about what "metrics" are in this context?

```YAML
checks for MY_TABLE_1:
  # MY_NUM_COL_1 has a minimum of above or equal 0
  - min(MY_NUM_COL_1) >= 0
  # MY_TEXT_COL has less than 10% missing values
  - missing_percent(MY_TEXT_COL) < 10
checks for MY_TABLE_2:
  # MY_NUM_COL_2 has an average between 100 and 1000
  - avg(MY_NUM_COL_2) is between 100 and 1000
  # MY_ID_COL has no duplicates
  - duplicate_count(MY_ID_COL) = 0
```

> It is possible to add optional check configurations like naming a check or configure warning vs failing conditions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to add optional check configurations like naming a check or configure warning versus failing conditions:
```

```YAML
checks for MY_TABLE_1:
  # fail the check when MY_TABLE_1 has less than 10 or more than a million rows
  # warn if there are less than 100 (but 10 or more) rows
  - row_count:
      warn: when < 100
      fail:
        when < 10
        when > 1000000
      name: Wrong number of rows!
```

> How a metric is defined can be further specified using a:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How a metric is defined can be specified using any one of the following methods:
```

- List of values.
- Predefined valid format.
- Regex.
- SQL query.

```YAML
checks for MY_TABLE_1:
  # MY_CATEGORICAL_COL has no other values than val1, val2 and val3
  - invalid_count(MY_CATEGORICAL_COL) = 0:
      valid values: ['val1', 'val2', 'val3']
  # less than 10 missing valid IP addresses
  - missing_count(IP_ADDRESS_COL) < 10:
      valid format: ip address
  # WEBSITE_COL has less than 5% entries that don't contain "astronomer.io"
  - invalid_percent(WEBSITE_COL) < 5:
      valid regex: astronomer\.io
  # The average of 3 columns for values of category_1 is between 10 and 100
  - my_average_total_for_category_1 between 10 and 100:
      my_average_total_for_category_1 query: |
        SELECT AVG(MY_COL_1 + MY_COL_2 + MY_COL_3)
        FROM MY_TABLE_1
        WHERE MY_CATEGORY = 'category_1'
```

> Two more unique features are freshness checks, schema checks and reference checks:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two more unique features of Soda Core are freshness checks, schema checks and reference checks:
```
Shouldn't this say "three" more unique features? Or are "schema checks and reference checks" meant to be a single feature?

```YAML
checks for MY_TABLE_1:
  # MY_DATE has no values older than 10 days
  - freshness(MY_DATE) <= 10d
  # The schema has to have the MY_KEY column
  - schema:
      fail:
        when required column missing: [MY_KEY]
  # all names listed in MY_TABLE_1's MY_NAMES column have to also exists
  # in the MY_CUSTOMER_NAMES column in MY_TABLE_2
  - values in (MY_NAMES) must exist in MY_TABLE_2 (MY_CUSTOMER_NAMES)
```

## Requirements

> To use Soda Core, the Soda Core package for the database backend needs to be installed and configured. The [Soda documentation provides a list of supported databases](https://docs.soda.io/soda-core/configuration.html) and how to configure them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Soda Core, the Soda Core package for the database backend needs to be installed and configured. The [Soda documentation provides a list of supported databases](https://docs.soda.io/soda-core/configuration.html) and how to configure them.
```

Is this a general requirement, or specific to using Soda Core with Airflow?

> For the DAG code no additional providers or packages need to be installed since the `BashOperator` is part of the Airflow core.

Reviewer 2: Here we say no additional packages need to be installed, but in the section below one of the steps is to install the `soda-core-snowflake` package. Maybe we don't need a separate reqs section and we can just add a note somewhere that using Soda Core requires setting something up against your database?

> ## Example: Run Soda Core checks on a Snowflake database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Example: Run Soda Core checks from Airflow
```

I think we should generally update the language in this section to be a bit more focused on Airflow.

This example shows one possible way to set up data quality checks on a Snowflake database using Soda Core.

The setup can be divided into the following steps:

- Create a configuration file that connects to the Snowflake database: `configuration.yml`.
- Create a checks file containing the data quality checks: `checks.yml`.
- Install the `soda-core-snowflake` package in your Airflow environment.

> - Create the DAG code running the `soca scan` command using the `BashOperator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Run the checks from a DAG by running the `soca scan` command using the `BashOperator`.
```

### Step 1: Create the configuration file

> The configuration file needed to connect to Snowflake can be created from the template in the Soda documentation as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First we need to create a configuration file to connect to Snowflake. The easiest way to create the file is to use the template in the Soda documentation as shown below.
```

```YAML
# the first line names the datasource "MY_DATASOURCE"
data_source MY_DATASOURCE:
  type: snowflake
  connection:
    # provide your snowflake username and password in double quotes
    username: "MY_USERNAME"
    password: "MY_PASSWORD"
    # provide the account in the format xy12345.eu-central-1
    account: my_account
    database: MY_DATABASE
    warehouse: MY_WAREHOUSE
    # if your connection times out you may need to adjust the timeout value
    connection_timeout: 300
    role: MY_ROLE
    client_session_keep_alive:
    session_parameters:
      QUERY_TAG: soda-queries
      QUOTED_IDENTIFIERS_IGNORE_CASE: false
  schema: MY_SCHEMA
```

### Step 2: Create the checks file

> You can define your data quality checks using the [many checks available for Soda CL](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/soda-cl-overview.html). If you cannot find a predefined metric or check that works for your use case you can create a user-defined check using SQL as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can define your data quality checks using the [many checks available for Soda CL](https://docs.soda.io/soda-cl/soda-cl-overview.html). If you cannot find a predefined metric or check that works for your use case, you can create a user-defined check using SQL as shown below.
```

```YAML
checks for example_table:
  # check that MY_DATE_COL has dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01 using regex
  - invalid_count(MY_DATE_COL) = 0:
      valid regex: (((20)?(1[7-9]|2[0-1]))[-](0?[0-9]|1[012])[-](0?[0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[01])|2022[-]01[-]01)
  # check that all entries in MY_DATE_COL are unique
  - duplicate_count(MY_DATE_COL) = 0
  # check that MY_TEXT_COL has no missing values
  - missing_count(MY_TEXT_COL) = 0
  # check that MY_TEXT_COL has at least 10 distinct values using SQL
  - distinct_vals >= 10:
      distinct_vals query: |
        SELECT DISTINCT(MY_TEXT_COL) FROM example_table
  # check that MY_NUM_COL has a minimum between 90 and 110
  - min(MY_NUM_COL) between 90 and 110
  # check that example table has at least 1000 rows
  - row_count >= 1000
  # check that the sum of MY_COL_2 is bigger than the sum of MY_COL_1
  - sum_difference > 0:
      sum_difference query: |
        SELECT SUM(MY_COL_2) - SUM(MY_COL_1) FROM example_table
  # checks that all entries in MY_COL_3 are part of a set or possible values
  - invalid_count(MY_COL_3) = 0:
      valid values: ['val1', 'val2', 'val3', 'val4']
```

> > **Note**: You need to make both YAML files available to your Airflow environment. Users of the Astro CLI can simply put them into the `/include` folder.

Reviewer 2: I was looking for this comment a bit earlier, so let's clearly state in both sections where to put the YAML files.

Author: put it into requirements too 🙂

### Step 3: Install the Soda Core package

The `soda-core-snowflake` package needs to be installed in your Airflow environment. Astro CLI users can add the following line to the `requirements.txt` file:

```text
soda-core-snowflake
```

### Step 4: Run soda scan using the BashOperator

> The DAG code itself stays very simple with one task using the `BashOperator` to execute the `soda scan` command. Of course it is possible to incorporate data quality checks using Soda Core in different locations within your data pipeline.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a DAG, Soda Core checks are executed by using the `BashOperator` to run the `soda scan` command. The DAG below shows how to reference the configuration and checks YAML files in the command.
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import datetime

from airflow.operators.bash import BashOperator

SODA_PATH="<filepath>" # can be specified as an env variable

with DAG(
    dag_id="soda_example_dag",
    schedule_interval='@daily',
    start_date=datetime(2022,8,1),
    catchup=False
) as dag:

    soda_test = BashOperator(
        task_id="soda_test",
        bash_command=f"soda scan -d MY_DATASOURCE -c \
            {SODA_PATH}/configuration.yml {SODA_PATH}/checks.yml"
    )

    soda_test
```

> The logs from the Soda Core checks can be found in the Airflow task logs. They will list all checks that ran with their result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The logs from the Soda Core checks can be found in the Airflow task logs. The logs will list all checks that ran along with their result.
```

Below an example of the logs in the case of 3 checks passing:

```text
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO - Scan summary:
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO - 3/3 checks PASSED:
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -     MY_TABLE in MY_DATASOURCE
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       duplicate_count(MY_ID_COLUMN) = 0 [PASSED]
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       missing_count(MY_ID_COLUMN) = 0 [PASSED]
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       min(MY_NUM_COL) between 0 and 10 [PASSED]
[2022-08-04, 13:07:22 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO - All is good. No failures. No warnings. No errors.
```

> In case of failure of a check, the logs will show which check failed and what the `check_value` was that caused the failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of a check failure, the logs will show which check failed and the `check_value` that caused the failure.
```

[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -     MY_TABLE in MY_DATASOURCE
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       duplicate_count(MY_ID_COLUMN) = 0 [PASSED]
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       missing_count(MY_ID_COLUMN) = 0 [PASSED]
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO - 1/3 checks FAILED:
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -     MY_TABLE in MY_DATASOURCE
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -       max(MY_NUM_COL) between 10 and 20 [FAILED]
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO -         check_value: 3
[2022-08-04, 13:23:59 UTC] {subprocess.py:92} INFO - Oops! 1 failures. 0 warnings. 0 errors. 2 pass.
[2022-08-04, 13:24:00 UTC] {subprocess.py:96} INFO - Command exited with return code 2
[2022-08-04, 13:24:00 UTC] {taskinstance.py:1909} ERROR - Task failed with exception
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/airflow/operators/bash.py", line 194, in execute
    raise AirflowException(
airflow.exceptions.AirflowException: Bash command failed. The command returned a non-zero exit code 2.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Of course it is possible to incorporate data quality checks using Soda Core in different locations within your DAG, and to use the results of those checks to control the flow of data within your pipeline.  
```
